[Music]
conversations with Tom I am here with
none other than Ryan holiday dude thank
you for joining me
course so this is gonna be the hopefully
most laid-back and then laid-back strong
word it's gonna be far more informal as
I was explaining before I want to push
my own thinking in real time yeah which
means I'm a [__] up your flow which on
impact theory it's all about I want the
guests to get in the flow I want to like
you said walk them through the book I
want I want to set them up to get their
ideas across in the best possible way
for the audience okay
so that show will continue to do its
thing but what I want to do with this is
push my own thinking in real time sure
chase things that I'm fascinated by
which some of it will almost certainly
be a miss right I'm going to go down
some rabbit hole that's gonna end up
being [__] and we're not gonna cut it
out we're like just gonna let it rock
this is gonna be unedited that was the
other thing impact here he's not
I can't scale it it takes so much of my
time so much of the team's time that it
was like once a week if I tried to do
any more the team started having heart
palpitations yeah so I said alright
let's come up with a new show format
something that requires less than 11
hours of prep on my part and an
interminable amount of time on theirs
and you know just see where it goes who
happens and you had asked me a question
just a second ago because I said I'm
violating the number-one rule of
perennial seller with your amazing books
which is don't try to do two things at
one time
which is precisely what I'm doing and so
you would ask what the two things were
and they are
I am simultaneously trying to build that
would all call the nonfiction side the
social side so it's me staring directly
into a camera and telling people sure
this is how you think this is how you
act and you're gonna get farther in life
than you otherwise would and then the
other side is pure fiction
it's creating comic books and movies and
TV shows and while there is massive
amounts of synergy there's no question
that it is not the same audience so
every person that I pour into the
nonfiction side there's not they aren't
necessarily backwards compatible to the
people on the fiction side I hope the
people on the fiction side are
completely compatible the other way and
that is sort of a graduation system
where we capture you emotionally with
the fiction and then
hopefully we can graduate you ultimately
into the nonfiction so I don't think
that's a wine I very much relate and to
I'm not sure it's a contradiction and if
I'm remembering what I'm saying in
printing uh so I think my argument is
don't have two contradictory goals at
the same time so someone goes like I'm
trying to write a work of you know
literary fiction for fancy people and I
want to be really famous at the same
time like they'll do or they're like I
want to sell lots of copies but I want
to win lots of awards and those are
again not always the same thing and so
you're asking for two separate what the
mistake there is you're you're pursuing
two different outcomes with one product
right and that's if not impossible very
difficult I very much relate to what
you're doing because I do all sorts of
different types of books right so and
and there is this hope or this dream
that like so I write these self-help
books you know you go the enemy
obstacles away I would have thought like
hey write this book conspiracy which is
like a nonfiction book about how you
know sort of power operates behind the
scenes and it's driven by narrative I
would have thought there'd be like a
one-to-one connection the netbook is
done well but it's almost exclusively
done well with people who didn't read
the other books and so in in a way one
read is disappoint disappointment the
other read is that it's actually
additive right and then I would say both
those things are irrelevant because at
the end of the day as an artist as a
creator as an entrepreneur although you
have to be driven by business and you
have to be driven by like success
because if you're not like the the you
run our fuel is in the form of money but
like you do the things that get you out
of bed in the morning like you don't not
work on something because you're you
think it will do well but you're not
interested in it and conversely if
you're super interested in something
it's usually a mistake to just like
shove that away and you know I'm saying
like you got to go where the heart goes
that is interesting that's an
interesting summation that it didn't
expect you to end with I want to go back
to something you said so I'm sort of
mulling over that notion if you have to
go over the heart
because I think the the real truth of it
is you have to have the business
documents so you said you can you can't
pretend that money doesn't exist and
this is what I find with beginning
entrepreneurs especially because I'm the
guy that's out there like hey you really
need to have a passion there needs to be
a why like I tell the story about
starting quest because I wanted to save
my mom and my sister and so people
resonate with that yeah and there's
there's definitely that is super
powerful and very very true but if you
don't learn how to run a business if
you're not savvy enough to make
something profitable you're really gonna
fall by the wayside and so yes you need
to go where the heart goes but at the
same time because I get hit up by people
all the time that are like I want to
build this audience I want to help
people and like that's you're coming
from a beautiful place but if you don't
[__] understand business like you're
never going to get anywhere yeah I think
that's right so with my books like I
think there are things I could do that
would make them sell more copies that
it's not that I'm not willing to do
because they're marketing it's more like
I think I could write a simpler less
nuanced book in any one of my books but
I don't think that would be
intellectually honest right like mining
you find something you find the way that
you write more interesting it's both
interesting but also at like chives of
my principle it's like look I think the
secret is the most successful self-help
book of all time because it tells people
what they want to hear but and I think
it's utter [__] right like you're
just manic that you can make more money
telling people what they want to hear
rather than giving them what they need
just like I'm sure there were all sorts
of corners you could have cut with quest
that would have made the company more
profitable and probably even made the
things taste better or sell better but
ultimately been in contradiction with
the whole reason you started the company
with the begin with so it's like I
became a writer just to pursue what's
interesting to me to say what I think is
true you know to popularize the ideas
that I think are important I'm not going
to then go do the opposite of that or
only 80% of that because I think I can
sell more copies that way like I guess
it's just about finding a balance right
it's like how successful do you want to
be and what are you willing to do just
like every athlete could probably
like look is there a way I could get
away with doping and is that how I want
to win yes or no it's interesting I feel
like there might be a slightly different
fundamental question that people have to
ask themselves okay which is how do I
want to feel about myself when I'm by
myself and I guess I wonder like I do
not know this man I've never met him
ever in my life but Lance Armstrong yeah
I'm gonna guess from the things that
I've seen and again I do not [__]
know and if he wants to come on the show
I'd happily have this conversation but I
have a feeling that like to him pushing
the boundaries of what the human body
can do even with exhaustion of
substances like that that doesn't matter
to him and I'm guessing that he doesn't
lose sleep over that even if people want
him to yeah and so when you look at a
lot of either a violation of what most
people will say as a problem or a non
violation of what most people will see
as a problem has perchance very little
impact on how the person actually feels
about themselves and I would say that
how you feel about yourself is
ultimately the thing that should be
driving your decision-making yes you at
the end of the day you have to sleep in
your house right I mean you have to know
if they look yourself in the mirror and
Lance is actually a really interesting
guy I've gotten to know him in Austin
and and I think what he's told me I
think this is an interesting way to
think about it's a lesson I've sort of
thought about after he told to me he was
saying that basically I hope he doesn't
mind me sharing this but he was saying
this sort of you know he's always a
competitive person he's always very
driven and always very good at what he
did he was one of the best in the world
and then he gets cancer and all of a
sudden now he's in the fight right or
the fight of his life and in the fight
against cancer like beating cancer was
living and losing to cancer was dying
right and he sort of said it was kind of
like a there was a switch that flipped
in his brain or it was just wires that
cross was like he was perfectly built to
beat cancer but what he walked out from
that was maybe it was some twisting and
the wirings and that and that winning
itself was now living and losing was
dying and so it become it's it's like
you know water boils at 212 and it
doesn't boil at 211 and so like the tiny
degrees of difference can have massive
impact on things and so I think it's
just you you want to know like who do
you want to be where do you want to end
up and then realize that as you're
making these decisions that don't seem
big or small just how they can end up
taking you in radically different
directions and and look like the whole
doping in in cycling such a complicated
issue and it doesn't really work well in
our sort of outraged outraged culture to
wrap our heads around it but I just took
it's like oh okay like that's something
I don't want to make that Association my
life because like I I have a for me
winning is is not simply like what for
some people winning in as being an
author selling lots of copies I want to
sell copies I don't want to be the
obscure author that nobody heard of
because you're not having any impact I
don't want to be a person that everyone
says they liked but don't actually read
I want to be kind of in the middle you
know and like for me the goal is like do
do people I respect who really get a lot
out of the books right so like at the
elitist levels of performance is the
book working and resonating and what
I've just realised the trade-off to get
there is that it doesn't work as well
for ordinary people like it's still
enough that the books have sold quite
well I make comfortable and it's been
awesome but the question is like am I am
I gonna write a book so simple that an
NFL coach is like what kind of I can't
do anything with this but I might sell
30% more copies to ordinary people not
that I have a problem with ordinary
people but you know I mean it's like
deciding who you're doing this thing for
is really important because then just
the idea that a number determines
success is way to buy an arien way too
simple so I want to go back to what
you're saying about Lance Armstrong that
should is so interesting to me and so
the the notion that winning itself is
life yeah so I think a big reason that a
lot of people fail is they don't they're
not obsessed like truly truly they're
not obsessed about figuring something
out and I'm super curious to see what
you think about this because of the the
stoic bent
like your new book which are we able to
talk about the new course no it's
alright so stillness is the key right so
the the notion of being able to tap into
stillness incredibly incredibly powerful
yeah but a little bit of Alexander the
great of the need to conquer of the need
to win to be out front to kill to like
like do your thing man like that that's
how [__] people win right Hannibal I
will either find a way or make one like
when you have that level of obsession
and whether it's you know Lance
realizing in his battle for cancer that
he is just perfectly and I'm assuming he
meant perfectly wired to be cancer
because he won't quit yeah he's just got
an ability to suffer and endure that
your average human does not so that to
me is [__] interesting and I really
feel like if people cannot cultivate
that in their life they won't be able to
play at the level that many of them
profess to want to play now I'm not
obviously not speaking for everybody not
everybody wants to be at that level but
I think want to play this is this is a
sort of perennial question can you be
world-class can you be best in the world
and be anything else you know what I
mean
do you it does it have to ruin you as a
human being I don't want to get that for
but you know I don't mean like do you
have to be a monster but I just mean can
you be singularly focused or can you
have a slightly more balanced life and
what's your answer to them yeah yeah I
think I think about it a lot one of the
stories I tell on still misses is the
story of Michael Jordan clearly probably
the greatest basketball player of all
time certainly for for you know a
generation the greatest basketball
player of all time done things no one
has ever done and probably ever will be
able to do again but when you watch the
Michael Jordan Hall of Fame speech and
you go ah this strategy is not without
its costs and and it's not that Michael
Jordan was it's what you realize is that
his obsession was primarily in the way
for Armstrong it's driven by you know
winning his living for Jordan it was
clearly like anger is the fuel that he
used to achieve his greatness and I
think what what we do when we do what we
do young people and aspiring people a
disservice is we go like
Oh Michael Jordan successful angry you
should be angry or whatever it is what
we what's pushed off into the future is
the cost of that and you saw that in
that Hall of Fame speech George raveling
told me is like what happened is he
shoved all this stuff in the closet and
then the closet
blew open in front of the entire world
and it was a wake-up call for him he
said Michael Jordan's much better now
having gone through a beach that that
was sort of the the that was a revealing
experience for him in many ways but he
didn't set out he didn't go up there to
come off that way and sometimes you can
only do things and see yourself from a
distance and go maybe I don't that's not
who I want to be so it's not I'm not
coming at it from a position of judging
I'm just saying like that anger meant
that he couldn't enjoy the crowning
achievement of his life and it was clear
that even as he was doing all these
things it was what he was motivated to
make himself like an open wound and and
I guess what I'm interested in is like
is that necessary and are there other
forms of fuel and and I'm not I'm you
know Lyndon Johnson once said that like
you got to have that sort of animal
instinct that like killer instinct but
you got to be able to keep it on a leash
right and I think so maybe that's one
compromise is just that like I'm
competitive I want to win but can I can
I check myself so I'm not just giving
myself I'm very suspicious of giving
myself over to anything and maybe I
leave some gains on the table but I also
am head I'm also preventing catastrophic
failure which so many of these people
end up doing not that's not the case for
Michael Jordan but we always want to be
careful the survivorship bias you see
Michael Jordan become the most
successful basketball player of all time
driven by anger what about the guy that
that that blew his opportunity in
college that you know blew his draft
interviews that that I mean there's a
there's this guy as a players his name
is Indu TEB and he was drafted
by the Timberwolves after kevin garnett
like one of the last high school players
and they said look you're really good
what we learned with kevin garnett is
that it takes a little bit of time for a
high school player to develop we want to
we want to put you in the developmental
leagues for a season and he was like
nope and so they cut him you know like
he couldn't he was like I he had that
like I'm good enough I can do it right
now you can't teach me anything and he
plays in Turkey right now you know what
I mean like
so we fruit we don't hear about guys
like that because most of the stories we
tell culturally are about when it works
out and we lose sight of the when the
obsession turns into the Lance Armstrong
situation or turns into worse than that
situation this this is what scares me so
I want to my mission in life maybe is a
better way to say it is to find an
access point for the average person to
develop greatness in their life yeah
okay so that one requires a definition
of what is greatness and I will define
it there's I think a real temptation for
people to say whatever is greatness for
you and I will say that that is true of
success I don't think it's true of
greatness yeah so successes hey how do
you define it and you've talked a lot
about success for me as freedom I
totally buy into that it's a super
personal thing right what I want to do
and I used to back a quest I called it
mining for astronauts I really want to
find the next crop of extraordinary
human talent sure now for sure I'm
deeply distressed by the importance of
intelligence plays and all of that and I
don't quite know where I settle out on
that okay I kind of like biologically
yeah so I I recent science seems to show
I was researching this for my upcoming
book research seems to suggest that 50%
is hardwired and 50% is malleability
okay so I'm just gonna set aside the
hardwired part for now and say that
they're the radical change that you can
have in your life with the 50% that is
malleable is so extraordinary even if
all you can do is improve yourself 10x
whatever that focus on that right yeah
doing some 10x thing but the only way I
know how to present all of this to you
is through the lens of greatness
of real measurable achievement that we
can say we were aiming for this and
neither we hit it or we did so then I
get into the notion of alright obsession
and what does obsession look like and
how do you begin to balance this stuff
and so my theory around obsession is
that most of the I've just always broken
it down 80/20 and what's that the Pareto
distribution of principle or whatever so
that's it's probably largely [__]
but that gets you at least in the
neighborhood of reality yeah and for me
in my life the thing that I have found
is 80% of my energies can come from
something beautiful the thing that I'm
trying to accomplish the people that I
want to help what I want to build what I
want to create my own self-improvement
all of that but there there's 20% of the
time where I'm just too [__] tired
and I just want to stop I want to be
lazy I want to give in to sort of base
vice and status all of that and in those
moments when I'm bone tired yeah the
only thing that gets me out is the rage
to win and in those moments it is a dark
energy it's ugly energy but it is so
[__] effective and looking at science
and I really need to look this up so
I've been I've been bullshitting this
statistic forever I have no idea what a
real answer but it's something like 30
percent so they they take people to get
a baseline for pain tolerance
yeah they have you submerge your arm and
ice you leave it in for as long as you
can people pull it out they get a
baseline then they take another group of
people and they have them submerge their
arm and they say hey right at the second
where you want to pull it out I want you
to get really angry yell scream cussed
do whatever you need to but just see if
you can leave it in longer and they do
when they find the people that that put
themselves in that aggressive angry
state or able to leave it in something
like 30 percent longer and that feels so
true to me to what I know about the
human condition that in in like I keep a
list and it's the list of all the people
that told me I would never succeed that
or or more importantly the people that
actively want me to fail
uh-huh and they've made themselves known
in various ways for my life and when it
when I'm really really tired and I've
run out of all the like I want to do
something awesome for the world I want
to help my
if I want to feel some kind of way and
that all Peters out and I don't have the
energy anymore the thing that keeps me
in the game
is imagining that person celebrating my
defeat and that gives me new energy and
so their the the need to balance seems
painfully obvious like if you allow
yourself to steep in the anger and the
rage too much you begin to hardwire for
it it becomes the easiest emotion for
you to feel it is an ugly emotion it is
not fun to stay there for long periods
of time but it's incredibly [__]
useful and so like when I think about no
[__] really teaching people like you
said I want to give something to people
that is real and when I think about that
if you don't master the twenty percent
yeah in addition to the eighty percent
you won't achieve greatness you might
achieve success but you won't achieve
greatness well I think it's interesting
even to say that success from greatness
or not not necess you can have one and
not the other ideally you want both I
think that's important and should be
liberating for people I guess what I'd
say I have a lot of thoughts so so one
to me one of the most beautiful passages
and I think the most haunting to me in
in meditations by marks releases he goes
he's like run down the list of the
angriest the most driven the most
ambitious you know the the most I have
something to prove to the world people
of history and he goes like where are
they now
he was like dust or legend we're not
even legend and if what he's trying to
remind himself is that as powerful as
the tools they may be ultimately where
does it end up it ends up where we all
end up you know he says Alexander the
Great and his mule driver are buried in
the same ground right like that's not to
say one that you should be the mule
driver and not Alexander the Great it's
just the point is like at the end we all
become equal right that's that stoic
idea of memento mori aware and wringing
my finger it's like I want to be
tangibly reminded all the time that
separate from what gets you to success
success or greatness is ultimately
ephemeral as the most impact you can
have like not far from me in Austin
there's this natural part Dinosaur
National Monument you
stand in a footprint left by a dinosaur
110 million years ago Andros bed it's
crazy
dinosaur doesn't care it's [__] dead
you know what I mean it doesn't mean
anything like like doesn't matter what
you build here how important how many
people you touch that dinosaur left a
greater legacy than you will leave over
a long enough time span right 110
million years it's tangible it's right
there on the ground
but in the end most of us won't even
leave that right so there's a I think
what he's trying to say there is just
adding some humility here right and then
I think that goes to the point of if if
you're relying on anger to get you over
the hump to do something if you're just
in the way that you're relying on
adrenaline to lift a car off of a person
who's stuck great not good to live your
life in a adrenaline-fueled way because
eventually your adrenal glands fail and
then you have no ability to do that
right and so the the as as a as an oomph
as like an extra booster I get it and
probably use it myself I think the
problem is people tell themselves that's
how they're doing it but they're not
like like the problem with the the hey
I'm driven by proving these people wrong
strategy or the is or I'm gonna shove
this in their faces or I'm gonna get
even with them is that what I tend to
find happens is so you get there you did
I let's say I became an author to prove
to my mom and dad that they they
underestimated me well you get there and
then you don't feel what you expected to
feel you don't feel good right and then
so instead of going like okay I'm gonna
not do that anymore you go your your
mind without even you even knowing
begins inventing new grudges so it's
like if the point is the adrenal rush to
lift the car off that's a one-off thing
right I totally buy into that and agree
I think the problem what we have to be
careful of is how insidious anger is
anger is like ego it's like it's main
thing is self-preservation like anger
anger is not in the business of
forgiveness or in letting go anger is in
the business of
so you let it in and now it's like but
what about that other guy was laughing
do you know and so it never ends right
yeah that so I totally buy into that and
for me it is one of the most dangerous
things that you can do and I actually
think about my moral obligation to the
people that I'm trying to help do I have
a moral obligation to lead them down a
path that isn't dangerous yeah or do I
have a moral obligation to lead them
down a path that's effective yes and I
for sure lean on the side of
effectiveness so I'll alternate League
myself by my ability to take them down a
path of effectiveness but here's what I
struggle with some people are gonna get
it so I always call out like oh this is
advanced class [__] because I know that
people are really going to struggle like
hey two competing ideas you're gonna
have to hold them in your head at the
same time and it gets super weird and to
know when to lean on one and not the
other and then experience has taught me
that people then oversimplify your
message they cling on to one thing and
so I'm like [__] man when I say
something's advanced class it's usually
because it's dangerous
yeah and that if you play with this this
is to use a just brutally cliche thing
this is like playing with fire right
yeah the chances of you cooking your
meat versus getting burned it's like I
have no idea what you're gonna do with
it and fire is almost like too
conservative it's like you're playing
with jet fuel right there's a chance it
just blows you up right like it's it's
vinay TRO glycerin like it's it's very
fragile and I totally get I totally get
that dilemma because look my first book
is a book about media manipulation like
the intention of the book is they don't
do this or this is bad but at the same
time I'm also saying this is how it
works right
and so you at the end of the day like
you can't you can't control what people
do with the message you can only deliver
the message and do and this goes to what
we're saying you can only you might act
the message might reach more people if
you didn't put the caveats if you didn't
put the warnings if you if you just told
people what they wanted to hear which is
an excuse for anger but you gotta sit
with yourself at night and you got to
have your own standards and so
ultimately you'd have to know that you
put it out there in a way that you felt
was right at the time you put it out and
then what people do with it
ultimately these are consenting
responsible adults
yeah yeah I mean one certainly hopes
that they are consenting responsible
adults yeah that that's me is really
interesting what's something that has
surprised you so you do the daily stoic
yes really interesting and I love them
thank you what is I wondered if people
respond to ones you don't expect them to
respond to or if you get nervous at all
about which ones end up being really
populist so the the memento mori' thing
has been like of an unexpected vein
because for myself to excite people what
that is so memento mori is is this idea
just means remember death or remember
your own mortality and I think it's
probably it's it's not only one of the
most powerful themes in all of ancient
philosophy specifically stoicism but in
basically all of ancient art as well
like the most beautiful painting
painters used to paint pictures of
skulls and dancing skeletons and/or
decaying bodies and and and so this Jers
imagery of the inevitable decay the
entropy of life is this timeless theme
that basically goes all the way up to a
modern art and then it's just like
weird-ass shapes and stuff we like so we
stopped using art as a tool to remind us
of human primal things and started using
it as a status symbol you know what I
mean and and so what the Stoics are so
much of meditations and and and Senecas
writing is is just talking about how
easy it is to remand to forget that
you'll die or to have the wrong attitude
about diet like death one of my favorite
things from Seneca he goes like do not
think that you're moving towards death
he was like every second that passes is
death so don't think about it as like oh
I'm dying in the future and I should be
prepared for that think about the fact
that we're dying every day that you're
just why is that better it's just a
reminder it's not like death is this
thing in the future so I'm gonna dick
around today it's that like the dollars
that I spent on the couch I died one
hour of my death do you know what I mean
yeah and his point is that so many
people think that there's life and death
but there are ways of living that are
essentially a form of being dead and
that this is in fact how most people die
but most people live there's this sort
of haunting messed-up story in Seneca
one of the Emperor's is sort of like
walking down this row of you know
condemned prisoners and the prisoners
pleading for his life please don't kill
me and the emperor looks at him anything
and he's like you think you're alive you
know because this man's horrible way of
living was already death you know and
and so that just I think it's so
resonates with people because it's so
the opposite of of how modern life is
set up people die in hospitals far from
our house who spends time with old
people we are so segregated even by age
right there's been so many medical
advancements that death doesn't feel
random it feels like it's something your
fault they like if you eat healthy and
you're a good person obviously you'll
live a long time and on average you will
but that doesn't mean that non-smokers
don't get lung cancer all the [__]
time and you can't be one of those
people that doesn't mean that people
don't get hit with tree branches you
know and die or that doesn't mean that
countries don't go to war for no reason
and lots of you know like life is tragic
and it always has been for all of human
history and so that's that's definitely
I think the most powerful one and it's
something I I mean I keep on my desk I
mean I started wear this ring it's like
a reminder but I have I bought it on on
online it's a chunk of a tombstone and
it's like from so I don't know how this
came to be I hope nobody stole it but
it's from like an old Victorian grave so
a couple hundred years old and it just
it it just has the word dad on it
and it's so [__] interesting yeah
like I want to start asking people what
is some weird [__] that they have that
that is so interesting especially
knowing your views on death and being a
dad recently yeah and so it was crazy
this guy was a did you seek out the word
dad I was looking for something like
that and when I found it and I was like
that's that's it that's the reminder
that I want to have all the time
that one really hit me I'm not sure why
yeah the the word dad that it's an
actual tombstone because it's it because
what you're thinking about is what that
person meant to other people yes yes and
that this is something clearly people
identified that was part of his identity
and he's not here and not only is he not
here I don't even [__] know his name
nobody does not only is nobody know his
name but at some point after his death
even the ground he was buried in like
suffered an earthquake or somebody stole
it like so it's just there's a humility
in that and I think a reminder to be
present right like so when my let's say
I'm working at my desk and I'm writing
and my son he's almost three he comes
running reads think dad dad look at this
you know it that's like I'm gonna get
this writing done because I'm important
it's important to me but I am NOT gonna
ignore this thing I am gonna I'm not
saying I'm gonna quit my work and not
focus on it at all but I am NOT gonna
ignore this moment to be this thing
that's important to me do you know what
I mean
I do I think that gives I want to derail
on that but first I want to address like
the the notion of death memento do not
let me forget to come back to your son
come again because that's actually
really [__] we talked about that
before it yeah but I want to talk about
so I I have an evolving sense of what my
relationship to death should be so for a
very long time
it was patently obvious to me that I was
going to die but that we're living in a
period where it is conceivable that
we'll be able to hit escape velocity
from a health perspective and that by
the time we're 80 90 if we're able to
live that long that they can add a year
in a day to every year that we live or
whatever so just live a lot longer than
humans have conceived of life as being
correct so I thought okay that's
interesting to me because I want to live
my life in such a way where my limited
amount of time does not impact the size
of my dreams so it wasn't a denial of
death it was just kind of a cool escape
valve for me to even as I got older to
continue to have big
that you know sort of by any stretch of
the imagination would probably go on
beyond me but because tomorrow was never
guaranteed anyway even when I was 16
yeah that there's only that the the sort
of false or maybe a better way to think
of it is from an actuarial table
standpoint you are probably going to
live long enough for you to have that
40-year dream yeah six your dream or
whatever so because of that you just you
do you have these long ranging dreams
and I felt like because I had long
ranging dreams I was able to do some
pretty extraordinary things but only
because I was thinking so long-term so
okay as I get older I don't want to stop
having these long-term dreams so I
really allowed myself to soak in the
notion of hey you might live forever so
keep having these big long-range dreams
now hearing enough people talk about
momentum or E or whatever
I started thinking all right people that
I really respect are telling me that I
need to really think closely about the
notion of dying so I thought okay let me
really stop and inspect how that would
impact me what does that change in terms
of the way that I live or how I perceive
life or whatever and so far I will say
because I'm already like it is it is
that the absolute core of my being to
only do things that matter to love
deeply to connect to the people that I
love to not waste time all that like I
don't know I personally don't need that
reminder yeah many people do and it's
very you sir for that that isn't the
reminder that I need I find that it's
actually it it feels important to
acknowledge the inevitability currently
of my death but at the same time I find
that now I have to fight harder to have
long-range plans and I don't like the
way that feels so I it is it's it's
seemingly there's a contradiction
between being present and doing or
planning big things but I'm not sure
that there is I don't know exactly how
to solve for it but let's look at the
evidence right Marcus Aurelius here's
the guy he's reminding himself with how
ephemeral the emperors who came before
him were he's reminding himself of the
inevitability of death he's saying over
and over again the importance of being
present not being driven by anger
we can't say like that it this guy
didn't accomplish incredible things
right like that he that because of that
he just stayed in bed all day I think
what he's saying is like let's do the
right thing for the right reason you
look at Seneca same thing talking over
and over again about the death about the
important of the inevitability of death
the meaninglessness of posthumous fame
etc and yet still sits down and writes
these essays that continue to be read by
millions of people 2,000 plus years
after his death I think what it's about
is about stripping out the low-grade
anxiety or denial or whatever we have
and and being able to focus everything
in that that moment so when when Seneca
saying like you will die today could be
the last day of your life he's not
saying quit what you're doing and go
have an orgy or go shoot up heroin just
to see what it's like he's saying live
today like a complete day so like what
as I worked on stillness as the key is
something I was thinking about a lot was
like okay I could die before this book
gets published what happens to me it to
someone finish it doesn't get published
whatever does it sit in a drawer no
that's really my concern
what nor is it in my control right even
if I write in a will exactly what
Nabokov I think wrote very clearly like
destroy my manuscripts after my death
really yeah and lots of authors have
done this and nobody listened
you know Kafka same thing we only know
about these works because they're they
would be upset that we know who they are
right so what do I control what I do
control is did I do everything I could
today right did I leap like is the book
complete as of today do you know what I
mean like is it as complete up until the
point I was able to complete it so I go
you know the first two thirds are the
book that it could be as of today that's
what I do
does that make sense it does but I don't
know that it hits me emotionally so
let's try to unpack that a little bit so
if you're saying like hey I'm gonna do
my best and I'm gonna
be present which we actually didn't
address and I don't think as a
self-evident realization when one thinks
about their death
which would be interesting to hear your
thoughts around why that is your
association I I begin to think about so
if I were writing a book first of all
I'm such a process writer that I would
be the the type that's like bury the
[__] manuscript people would have no
big they just wouldn't believe how
scandalously bad my early drafts of
everything are so I I wouldn't think of
it in any other way than the following
did I sincerely pursue making this great
today yes or no that's what that I
totally agreement that's what it's about
he's saying like live every day as a
complete day and then when you wake up
tomorrow you're grateful because you get
a second day it's like you don't walk up
to the plate and swing at those pitches
and go I'll get it next time
you go like this is this is Game seven
you know this is [__] interesting so
I so I I still struggle with anxiety but
my anxiety used to be debilitating yeah
and one of the things that got me out of
that was to say there's no such thing as
performance there's only practice yeah
so literally the exact opposite of what
you're saying right now there is no game
seven even if it was game seven I would
have to tell myself hey this is just
practice and if you [__] this up no
worries you're gonna learn something
from this here's I think this is like a
life-changing assumption that I came to
about philosophy I'm not I don't sure
not sure exactly where I came to it but
it cracked open a whole thing for me and
maybe it was in the 48 laws of power
people don't like but the laws
contradict each other different
situations call for different
perspectives right they're not songs
life is [__] complicated life is a
paradox right and so I think what you
you go is like sometimes you need to be
told this moment is Game seven and
sometimes you go it's not even none of
this even matters you go back and forth
right this is so important and and so it
and and also let's think about what
philosophy actually is because now we
have these pretentious academics who are
like this is the theory of the universe
you know what what Epictetus or Seneca
or Marcus Aurelius is doing
is answering questions in the way that
like if I looked at all the queue A's
you've done I'd be like Tom have your
answers contradict each other that's
because you're talking to Steve and over
here you're talking to Susan and and
then maybe if you were talking with
Susan three weeks later you give a
totally different answer because it was
a different question or because she's
changed right like different things
required so if you're curing anxiety how
can we zoom out and get a different
perspective if you're wasting time or
you're if like if you're dwelling in the
past then we want to do you just do it
differently to get the different
perspectives that give you the tools to
be able to move forward and ultimately
what and I'm not trying to do this to
plug my book ultimately what we're
trying to do is get to a place of
stillness and clarity and focus so we
can be a hundred percent locked in and
whatever we're doing so that's what this
is all about and and sometimes you're
flashing forward sometimes you're
looking to history for perspective
sometimes you're emptying your mind
entirely it's it's just like every
situations got different handles and you
grab onto the right one at the right
time so wow you just put words of
something that I think is so incredibly
important and are you able to define
perspective because to me this is so the
book that I am writing is essentially
about how to craft and I don't like the
word perspective even though it's
probably the closest thing okay but the
ability to craft a perspective the
ability to add will change your
perspective is critically important and
I think that perspective is the very
thing that holds people back my
realization that the people in the inner
cities that were working for me a quest
that they had a bad perspective that was
going to blunt their ability to have an
extraordinary life yeah
that realization is why impact Theory
exists so like that whole notion of
perspective being this incredibly
meaningful thing this is at the center
of my philosophy in my drive and all
that are you able to define what a
perspective is there's a German word
boom welt and it basically made like a
dog has a different moon well that a
human
I would argue that a champion at this
sport versus a you know a an egotistical
loser who won't get off their couch
they have different ohm welts they have
different experiences of reality and the
ability to control that or to - it's
like you know your crank and the thing
on the binoculars that's what you want
to be able to cultivate and when you
look at what the Stokes are doing it's
sometimes they're zooming way in and
going like just look at the thing
immediately in front of you don't
extrapolate out to the hole that's
what's intimidating you and then other
times they're like look at the world
from above and how puny even the Roman
Empire is compared to other things and
they're in some cases in the same same
moment doing both of those and it's just
like it's just realizing that how we
look at the world is the the world is
objective but how we look at it
determines what we're gonna be able to
do to it Epictetus says it's not things
that upset us it's our opinions about
things right and so realizing like oh
okay the world is objective my opinion
is what determines everything by opinion
he means judgments right the other he
says it's not things that upset us it's
our judgment about things so it's really
judge maybe judgments a better word than
perspective well let's go back to the
notion of so I've heard it pronounced in
belt I don't know which is right I'm
well in belt whatever so to define at
least and I don't know if this is the
official Miriam Webster definition but a
big part of the need to define a new
belt or to have a word for it is take
birds or fish right they they actually
perceive data from the world differently
so let's chart can detect electrical
signals and you can actually fool the
shark into thinking that a metal plate
is a flopping fish because you just have
the plate emanate an electrical signal
here and it can't help but interpret it
that way but we would not notice
anything so we don't know that but like
isn't it interesting that we just assume
sharks are looking and smelling right
that's how we looking smelling in here
and we just go everyone must be
perceiving those senses it's not it we
don't even we can't even think about how
a bat perceives reality driven by radar
right yes 100% and so
I think something that drives my very
understanding of the world all of my
philosophies everything that I teach is
all about we are humans experiencing
life through a biological system and
that biological system has its own
unveil it has limitations we see only a
certain spectrum of light we hear only a
certain spectrum of sound like we can't
experience Wi-Fi signals like there yeah
there or maybe we do but on a cellular
level and so we have no conscious
awareness of it so it's like really
getting down to okay if you know that
your veld is limited and you know that
you're confined in this world and that
your brain actually is a region of it
that says not just what is happening but
how you feel about what is happening the
deep limbic system right your brain
actually processes things through the
lens of is this good or bad right that s
that you can knock out that part of the
brain and cause people massive problems
because it yeah once they don't have an
emotion about it they can't even decide
what they want for lunch are crazy so
wrapping your head around okay I I am
this I love the notion of the elephant
in the writer okay so who is the writer
I'm not even going to talk about that
right now I'm just gonna say you're a
writer your elephant is the biological
system and once you understand what
motivates that elephant to move to rage
to run to hunger sex sleep whatever then
you can begin to control it more
effortlessly and whether that's to
pursue stillness and or whether that is
just understanding your own motivations
and desires I think is incredibly
important where I get freaked out is
that people have no sense of the
elephant they have no sense that the
elephant is controlled by its envelop
they have no sense that like okay you
you do have a limited number of inputs
coming in in a limited number of ways
but even within that there's so much
degree of like interpretation that you
can take control of you can begin to
decide how you see your world and once
you decide how you're gonna see the
world it will hardwire over time if you
obsessively focus on that so that you
get a neurochemical response humans move
away from pain they move towards
pleasure so now you're changing what
gives you pleasure you're choosing or
changing what gives you pain and so
you're able to steer the hellephant you
made a face that says you're not sure
you believe that I'm just thinking yeah
okay so that to me like once you want to
and that then it's like okay you can
begin to control wrong word you can
begin to navigate more intelligently
your way through life because you have
some end goal yes you begin to hardwire
pleasure and pain in a way that is going
to move you towards that now I don't
think you have complete freedom over way
you can hardwire right but there's going
back to that 50/50 there is a massive
amount that you can shorten it be late
in that to go in a direction that makes
sense based on your goals yeah no I
totally agree and look I think an
interesting thing you realize when you
have kids is you go like oh this kid is
acting this way because he's really
tired hmm and that it that how he's
acting in this situation is not a
reflection of him it's a reflection of
environmental habit things like that
like we didn't give we didn't go down
for his nap that's why he's yelling he's
upset he says that it's because he wants
his toy really he wants to eat but he
doesn't know that that's what he wants
and then having the humility to go like
we're all not only are we all basically
just big children but most of us have an
inner child inside of us that you know
is responding with some childhood trauma
that we have that that is motivating and
steering a lot of like you're attracted
to this person because they remind you
of this other person or you repeat this
pattern where you end up frustrated or
upset or you know in pain because that's
a trauma that's familiar to you nurse
enact and so realizing that we're sort
of pulled by these forces let's you I
think or hopefully go oh I'm not mad I'm
tired do you know what I mean or go this
is I think this is what would make the
world a better place go this person who
I don't know who's rude to me in the
supermarket is not a bad person they're
just responding to one of these forces
right and this also I think allows us to
be more forgiving of people who are in
jail people who have failed people are
not successful you go oh all these
things are contributing but you have the
ability just like you can bring a
shelter or dog we go oh you can't turn
in you know you can't teach an old dog
new tricks
you can't teach your old dog new tricks
but if you got a dog from a shelter
you could teach you to sit very quickly
do you know what I mean because it's
like fresh for both of you and the
environment has changed and the
situation has changed and and that like
it's just silly to write other people
offer to write yourself off or to do
what do they call it the attribution
fallacy where we attribute because of
one piece of behavior or one flash
observance we attribute an entire
understanding about who that person is
or what they're capable of because we
saw them yell at someone or we saw them
be nice to someone and we don't realize
that actually they're serial killer do
you know what I mean
like this it's all very complicated that
escalated quickly yes yeah so I want to
go back to what you just said the super
interesting you and I think this is very
true the problem isn't that you can't
teach an old dog new tricks the problem
is you can't teach your old dog new
tricks and I assume in that analogy
you're saying like it might be hard for
you to change your own mind but if you
could step outside or have somebody come
in from the outside you could even be
very easily retrained maybe yeah I think
so that's why that's why when people
undergo a trauma where they find out
they have cancer or they move to a new
city suddenly a whole bunch of things
that weren't possible before become
possible or I think this also explains
why momentum is so valuable because it's
changing suddenly you think you're
capable of something that you're no more
or less capable of before but now you've
earned a little confidence or you see
yourself differently and then suddenly
everything changes that's really
interesting go down that path because I
think that what you're calling momentum
what I think most people would refer to
in that scenario is confidence yeah is
one of the most important things for
peep in business
probably in life but I always think
about it in the business context for
them to be able to create that momentum
one how do you create that momentum why
does it matter so much well so I just
hear from lots of people who want to
write books right there'll be someone
there like hey I'm you know a super
successful CEO of X or you know I've
done this for like I've been a
professional athlete unless the next ten
year the last ten years and I want to
become you know a motivational speaker
or something and they go like help me
make a book and I go like why are you
start
with the hardest thing like right one
tweet you know or one article like you
know what I mean do what like it the
idea that you should just for flat fast
forward all the way to the end without
building the process to get there like
to me that's what momentum is that
that's the path at what you will write a
better book if you've gotten reps
earlier in the thing and but people just
want the outcome they don't want the
process and so I I think you know it's
like if you were trying to lose weight
people like I got to change everything
and it's probably like James clear talks
about this anatomic habit like what's
the smallest unit of change that you can
make because you can build on that and
in writing we say something similar
where it's like you can edit crappy
pages and turn them into good pages you
cannot edit pages that don't exist you
know like and and so but people are
paralyzed by the idea of having
something perfect or something that
lives up to their standards and so they
don't start yeah Seth Godin talks about
like people always come to him and say
oh I'm a terrible writer I could never
do that he's like awesome let me see
your terrible pages right and he was
like they never have any and it's like
they have this belief that they're not
good but they're not even putting in the
work to actually get better and improve
yes
which going back to that whole notion of
perspective your perspective is going to
determine what you pursue so it's what I
call the only belief that matters the
only belief that matters is that you
think you can actually get better that
you think by putting in the energy in
the effort that will be rewarded with an
improvement in your skill set yeah just
what I say is if you don't believe you
can do something you almost certainly
cannot do it but just because you
believe you can do something doesn't
mean you can do it right and so when
Churchill is saying that you know
perfection can be spelled paralysis with
with the word paralysis I think he's not
saying that you shouldn't you shouldn't
try to be really really really good so
that gets a very subtle perspective
shift it's like oh no I'm approaching
perfection but I understand that
perfection is impossible right so then
you're like oh I'm getting better
that now progress is possible but if
you're like my end goal is to be perfect
you've essentially it's it's a tricky
thing because what you're really doing
is giving yourself an excuse not to
start because you know the thing is
impossible right like if you can lose
weight you cannot get taller right so if
you go my goal is to grow a foot this
year and then if I checked in with you a
year later I'd be like what you do you'd
be like nothing because it's not
possible but if I said hey you know your
your goal is to lose 20 pounds there's
at least things you can do to get there
well here's the good news you actually
could get a foot taller you know about
the bone breaking techniques that they
use on how they have dwarfism and stuff
no you didn't know about this huh this
is [__] crazy man so this comes down
to why I always like I tell people look
human potential is nearly limitless now
he used to say it's limitless yeah but
people just settle for spective [__]
dumb [__] right what you want to talk
perspec
like if your perspective is such that
you're going to waste your time pushing
back on somebody who's saying that
things are you know that human potential
some of them it's like come on man yeah
so act as if but my thing is that the
very reason that I I know that the the
law of averages says that some massive
percentages at twenty is it thirty
percent they legitimately fall below
what I'll call minimum requirements
they're not gonna be able to make change
in their life yeah it's I think the US
military won't it's like 40 percent of
male populations it's like a disgust
about dance won't bring on people to
have lower than 83 IQ oh I was just
gonna say that that is a more loaded my
was responded to like the mill like 50
percent of the population does not even
qualify to be in the military it's it's
it's somewhat intelligent it's a very
large number but it's like just being
overweight like they won't take you if
you weigh over a certain amount and
you're like the job that was supposed to
be and I'm not saying the military's the
lowest but the that's the entrance
military was most to be the level of
ultimate equality of opportunity like
they're like we'll take anyone and turn
them into excellence and then they're
like but these people haven't even
gotten to zero you know what I mean
they're at like negative 50 if you've
got to get to zero for us to work our
magic
I didn't realize that they had weight
requirements yeah you can't like you
couldn't just enlist in the Marines if
you weight 500 pounds actually I did
sort of vaguely know that but I thought
that was for morally D no David Goggins
yeah so they told him hey you have to
lose 100 pounds in like 4 weeks or so
absurd amount of time and the fact that
he does it is just right insanity yeah
so going back so I used to tell people
that you know your human potential is
limitless yeah people would push back in
the dumbest [__] and the reason that I
would say that is I'm I was so worried
that people would assume they fell into
like Oh what I want to do is the thing
that can't be done or whatever and my
thing is look if you act as if anything
can be done you're actually better off
even though I know it's not true like
God is definitively a lie sure but if
you act as if it were true
you're much less likely to make the
mistake of not trying something that
actually is possible so I'll give a
quick example the bone breaking yeah so
you can go in and if you break the bone
and then separate it like a centimeter
some very small increment the bone why
should grow back together then you break
it again yeah it goes back together and
again and again and people that have
dwarfism they can actually I mean it's I
don't know what the upper limit is but
let's say it's it's got to be close to a
foot it's pretty quickly someone just
did an AMA and read it about hey I just
grew a foot in the last whatever two
years or something doing that technique
so it's [__] crazy the number of
things that you can do that people just
assume you can't there was another one I
had this guy on oh can I remember his
name he was on impact Theory Oh
neuroscientists I'm blanking on his name
right now I'm so sad he was so cool
Israeli guy really interesting and he
was doing some studying and he basically
did a sort of this a technique of brain
scanning that if you sort of carried it
out to his logical conclusion like it
could record dreams and so somebody he
publishes a paper on as somebody calls
him in the middle of the night and says
so are you saying that you can record
dreams and he is like half asleep he's
[__] exhausted and he ends up saying
well yeah I guess you could and then the
next day the headline reads
neuroscientist says that you can record
dreams yeah
and he panics and he's like I'm gonna
get kicked out of academia like
everyone's gonna realize I'm a quack
[__] and he's trying to rescind it and
it just won't go away and for a year it
just runs out of control and people are
saying that oh my god this is possible
and he's trying to retract it nobody
will let him retract it he has all this
anxiety about it and he's really
freaking out that it's gonna end his
career and then finally it dies down and
he just sort of closes the door on it
and then like a year later this Japanese
researcher publishes a paper about how
they recorded dreams and he was like
what the hell and the guy says oh
because of you saying that you were
already doing it I just assumed that it
could be done and so I started doing it
and so he says that the ultimate lesson
he took away was not to say something as
possible when you believe it's not
possible he said the lesson I learned
was not to say something is impossible
yeah before you really go out and prove
that it can't be done
look I don't and it's so interesting
because people think because my stuff
and stones isn't that I'm like so much
pessimistic or resigned or like the
stoats are very clear on this too I mean
that one of my favorite passages in
Marcus Aurelius it goes if it's humanly
possible assume you can do it also so
it's the same thing it's just being
realistic it doesn't mean you're being
pessimistic necessarily it tends to be
that way for a lot of people but if you
have a good sense of what is actually
literally possible or or you've studied
history enough to see just the
Magnificent things human beings are
capable of doing and how regularly they
disprove our assumptions about things
you do have a you you don't go around to
thinking like oh I'm I have very little
agency you know what I mean you actually
have the sense that like actually you
can sort of change the world or or you
know change yourself at any moment and
what do you think that process looks
like like how malleable do you think we
really are like I think we can change
our values change the wiring of our
brain insurance change the neurochemical
response we have I laid that our yeah
like how far do you think that we can go
with this I mean I would maybe I'd push
back on with what you're saying is like
why don't we just assume we can go an
unlimited amount do you know any like
people I mean people spend a lot of time
trying to like disprove like whether
self-help works or you know it's like is
it hurting you know or
whatever yeah I mean people people like
I'll give you an example and you
mentioned it briefly but like people are
like oh let's see how inheritable
intelligence is or certain races you
know smarter than other races and I get
from an academic perspective I'm a free
speech guy so I'm like you should pursue
anything you want the scientific method
should take you where it takes you
we should be responsible with all things
but like I don't think really anything
should be off-limits in terms of like
what we studied Theodore Roosevelt is
great line that you someone who's
talking about how men were smarter than
women or something and he was like even
if that's true do you know how many men
I meet that are much smarter than other
men do you know what it is like right
there there's you know what's the IQ
difference between us it doesn't [__]
matter what Matt it doesn't how many
people have you hired that that we're
not bright but they wanted the job five
hundred times more than the person who
is five points smarter than them so it
and these things if they matter at such
they really only met they were they
really only become statistically
significant at massive scale so even
like even if you're hiring at the scale
of the US military or hiring at the
scale of Google IQ points matter so
[__] little and and what are you
going to do ultimately what are you
gonna do with this information and so it
like I get you think about it because
you're you're teaching people these
things but I I sometimes people go like
you know is are these skills taught or
or are they natural and I go I don't
[__] know you know what I mean but
like I'm I'm gonna work under the
assumption that I can get better at them
because observably in my own life I've
gotten better at them do you know what I
mean and that's enough yeah it's this
this is the like the pulsating energetic
core of my what I want to do in the
world and it all comes from what you
just said which is people look at me the
after photo and assume that this was
obvious when I was young yeah it was not
right and nothing about where I've ended
up was a parents who might
to my best friend to my father a lot
like no nobody right expected that this
is what I was gonna do my best friend in
high school recently told me oh yeah I
just assumed you were gonna marshmallow
your way through life that is a direct
quote that was my best friend somebody
who loved and cared about me and wanted
me to succeed right but just based on
everything he knew about me that just
wasn't the pattern that I was on and so
my life has changed so radically and I
feel like whoa there were a few key
moments a few key people that I met that
gave me a few key pieces of information
and that ended up impacting the course
of my entire life
yeah and so out of out of excitement
more than anything else quite frankly I
want to give those same moments to other
people and see the direction that their
life goes and I look I get it not
everybody's gonna do something with it
but I so believe in the core like
ability to grow no I think we're saying
the same thing I'm I'm pushing back and
like people go like I've been reading
this paper and I think we live in a
computer simulation right it's like cool
what the [__] you're gonna do with this
information you still have to do what
you're ever gonna do today right and so
I think people can get obsessed with
like you know they'll they'll they're
actually doing the opposite you're
looking at this studies to find what is
possible and to find hope and to find
room for improvement almost explain the
own your own anomalous success right so
you can sprinkle that Obama's as Frazee
said successful people need to to not
feel like they did it entirely on their
own but that was part of a larger thing
and then they need to find ways to
sprinkle that Stardust on other people
that's what you're doing that's
wonderful I think some people maybe
because they're either supporters of big
sort of big government very patronizing
government or because they're you know
pessimists or nihilus they want to look
to this information and use it as an
excuse for for reducing human agency for
telling people that the game is rigged
for telling them that it doesn't matter
how hard you try you don't mean like
there's a way to limit potential
I am so aggressively in the opposite
direction so to answer your earlier
question about like why I look at this
or what does it matter I have so much
fear
that people turn off an empowering
message because they can smell the
[__] so go back to the secret yeah
the secret is actually half really
powerful but it's half such utter
[__] right that sure and people are
likely to gravitate to the part of just
think about things and you're gonna get
them okay now when I select guests to be
on the show dude I really really live in
fear of undermining my own sort of
holistic message of you you really can
do this yeah by having people that come
on and say like if you use the word
[__] quantum to mean anything other
than physics yeah like it makes my skin
crawl because I think that you're you're
going to lead people down a path of
where they will miss something truly
transformative because they try the easy
thing first which is probably the more
[__] II answer yeah it doesn't work
they find that it's [__] they sour
on the whole thing or people that they
respect look at it here the fluff the
[__] whatever and they're like
that's all garbage sure and so what I
what I want to do is I really believe
that there are times where you have to
lie to yourself because I think people
are so unable to accurately assess their
abilities that they're there gonna be
times where I will actively encourage
you to lie to yourself because I think
you're more prone to think negative [__]
about you okay and then on the other
hand talk about holding to competing
ideas in your head you have to be a
[__] slave to the truth you have to
know what is real and so my thing is I'm
trying to figure this stuff out
so that if if what I really want to do
is not [__] I actually want to help
people change their lives okay so I
actually want to do that then I need to
know what the [__] works and what
doesn't so my whole thing about 50%
isn't valuable and 50% is maybe that's
wrong I hope it's wrong I want it to be
that a hundred percent is valuable
nothing would make me happier than that
truly we are blank slates I will say
that my experience does not bear that
out yeah the science does not seem to
bear that out but I don't give a [__]
like if they tell me it's your
ninety-nine percent just carved in stone
and 1% malleable great because whatever
is real I've seen it play out in my own
life I don't give a [__] what the
percentages are I want to know oh it's
one percent cool I'm just not gonna
waste time bullshitting about what's not
real and I'm gonna [__] focus in on
how to tell you how to make the most
that one percent so my thing is I just
need to understand
and it now so that I can empower people
because here's here's what I know about
myself currently today as of the moment
that we're recording this yeah I have a
two-hour declining arc of influence if
you're with me dude which is why I have
I have a guy that works out of this
house he's not my [__] employee but
he works out of this house he's an
independent contractor has his own
[__] business
he used to be in my employee and he was
like dude when I'm around you I feel
like and I can do anything and then when
I left quest and he stayed he was like I
started to lose that sense that I could
accomplish anything so I was like come
[__] work out of the house I don't
give a [__]
I'll even he it comes to team lunch we
buy and lunch like all that [__] like I
I understand that if he's in the
environment if he's around me or other
people that are around me all the time
like he will do more with his life right
where we are the average of the five
people we spend the most time with so
getting him in that environment so I I'm
not okay with that just because I
recognize that I have a two hour
declining arc of influence today does
not mean that I'm okay that that is as
good as I ever get yeah so I'm [__]
trying to figure out for real like what
do i what do I need to say or do to
burrow into somebody to be able to
change and influence them in such a
profound way that even if they never
recognized that it's me like cuz a huge
part of my theory is that I need to tell
them stories yeah I need to give them
movies TV shows comic books video games
whatever that embed this empowering
ideology in their mind and you know ends
up playing itself out but that's why
like I mess with the [__] where's you
wanted me to remind you to go back to
the thing I was saying about my son
interrupted me dude you're my hero thank
you for that yeah so I think that
there's a flip side to that coin which
is and you were saying it but now I want
to talk about how it actually plays out
in real life okay that what you're doing
is important enough to keep doing and if
your son which he will by the way if you
continue to let him interrupt you
interrupt you he's gonna do it and do it
do it how do you know where to draw the
line I would say it's most of the time
it's like so if the question is like how
do you how do you sort of balance an
obsession with your work and the desire
to be good
and present for your family yes well
first off you design a life in which
these things are in conflict as rarely
as possible so I don't rarely work at my
house when it's possible for him to
interrupt at me right so so I'm I'm not
going to put myself in a position where
these two things are conflicting gonna
have to choose I'm gonna take him to
daycare
go to my office and I'm gonna sit there
uninterrupted for a very extended period
of time and then when I'm done I'm gonna
be done right that's how you mostly want
it I'm not necessarily referring to like
some like I'm finishing the conclusion
of a new book and I've built a chaotic
life where interruptions can intervene
at any time it's more like okay I'm
responding to this email from this
person it is important I'm going to do
it but in ten years or 50 years or five
minutes what I have a little distance
from it which one of those things do I
value more this total stranger who sent
me an unsolicited thing that I'm now
having to bat back out or is it the fact
that my son wanted to show me how his
train works do you know what I mean and
what ultimately fills me with more
happiness what ultimately provides that
sort of stillness or contentment that
allows me to go back to my actual work
and perform at a better level do you
know what I mean and so that's what I'm
saying I'm just saying it's like the
point is when you're not a great Russ
Roberts is one of my favorite writers is
his brilliant economist he wrote this
book how Adam Smith can change your life
he did like a spin on Jordan Peterson's
12 rules for life
he just listed his roles and one of his
rules is he's like always take her child
by the hand when they offer it meaning
if your child reaches out to you like
your kid says I want to go to the park
and you're saying but I was going to do
this other less important thing and said
you you take if they you you take their
hand when they offer the hand because
it's so rare you don't get that much
time it's it's I think the point is this
like now it's not put them first above
all things but it's don't actively
reject opportunities for connection
because at the end of your life those
are the things that really matter to you
there there's a great writer forgetting
his name he want a bunch of pure
surprises but he basically said it when
he had a when he and I know you disagree
with this because we talked about it but
I think would be interesting we
discussed he said when he when he wrote
his first book it was the sort of toast
of town and he was at a party you know
very well-known writer came up to him
and said whatever you do don't have kids
every kid you have the book you won't
write and he said he that really hit me
and I struggled as a longtime and then
he's like as I sit here now writing this
book which was a book about fatherhood
looking at my three children he goes
like I would take that trade was a
thousand percent worth it I think
they're in less conflict than people
think
but I I would definitely like I'm proud
of all my books I tend to write I intend
to write many more books but like my I
have three equal priorities in my life
my drop my my priority is to write many
books to stay married and liked it so to
be a good husband and to be a good
father
those are my three things I think
they're they're they're not it's not one
is higher than the other it's they're
all three at the top and I think they're
the better husband I am the better head
space I am in as a writer the more
supported I am as a writer the better
father I am the more I feel good about
myself the the more contented I feel the
more I learn about the human experience
you know what I mean they're all feed
into each other and I just think it's
this I think it's a unfortunate that
we've come to in turn not saying
everyone should have kids because not
everyone should have kids but I'm saying
it's very sad that we think that
greatness is the same as entering the
priesthood which means you have to
forsake all other worldly things which
by the way when you really look at the
history of religion is like I'm that's
not even in the Bible it's not Jesus was
like don't don't get married you know
there's even there's even pretty strong
evidence this isn't like da Vinci Code
so there are other takes on the Bible
that
Jesus was married you know I did is did
his was it a virgin birth no his mom
like had sex with a guy like you know
the the point I can feel the hate mail
yeah the the point the point is we
relationships are not at odds with
serenity with peace with greatness to me
and I think Eastern students of Eastern
religion either don't know this or they
gloss right over it
the saddest part of Buddhist trajectory
is when he walks out on his wife and
child to pursue enlightenment I to me
that is antithetical to enlightenment is
is a inherently a contradiction that's
interesting it's interesting that you
think that I would disagree with any of
that I don't think I disagree with a
single word you said
other than that I'm I when I look at my
own life yes I may just I guess fall
easily into the campus not everybody
should have kids and I think when people
hear that sentiment they think oh you
would be a bad father I think I would be
an extraordinary father yeah I just
don't have more interest in that than I
have in continuing to live the life that
I'm living now so when I heard about a
change right you don't know for sure and
trust me I've had in the back of my mind
out well if I you know wanted to adopt
or something I do worry that like at
some point you're just too old for it to
be interesting certainly interesting for
the kid where there just be such a gulf
between where you're at physically that
you wouldn't build a play properly
anyway that that's a whole nother thing
but if time were infinite there's no
question I would have children sure
because then there would be no need to
choose but in every day I'm already at
the point where there are more things
that I'm passionate about that I want to
do and I think that and and don't have
time to do and then I think that kids
are one of the most sort of beautifully
prepackaged ways to get fulfillment that
a human being will ever find and since I
think that ultimately fulfillment is the
only thing that matters for most people
it is probably the no-brainer solution
to hey you're not fulfilled in any area
of your life have a thright a thriving
relationship with your
spouse and child right so the thriving
part is the key because so many people
then just carry whatever dysfunction
they have and the rest of their life
they carried over to their marriage and
their child but I think that the reason
cuz here here's my thing I could steal
man having kids so well that you would
believe I had kids yeah like I could do
it in a poetic form where you'd be like
[__] this guy really gets it yeah
partly because for eight years I was
essentially a surrogate father to this
kid that I Big Brother four yeah and to
the point where when he got removed from
his family because he's being abused by
his single mother and I became the
guardian to help me in the court system
like I was yeah in this [__] kid's
life so like I get yeah and I get it to
the point of also knowing that there are
parts of it that are not fun yeah and so
just sort of weighing everything on
balance it's like yeah it's probably
nothing I'd I think the first time we
met you told me I shouldn't have kids
not you said don't have kids you said
hey why you said something the
equivalent of like think of the
sacrifice that going to kids but that's
what I meant when I thought you you
might disagree here and I don't remember
what I said but if if I know myself well
enough it would have been something
along the lines of the way you think
there's something and I say this every
time we get together so hopefully people
see the consistency there's something
about the way you think I find
intoxicating you were one of my favorite
authors there's there's a way that you
step through things logically also
you're just a [__] good writer like
the way you have with a sentence is so
awesome I love it the most so selfishly
here if all you did if I could lock you
in a room and make you write the way
that you write with the depth of
understanding human condition all that
which of course would diminish but like
that is almost certainly sort of
tongue-in-cheek my advice and look I've
done I've got two kids have been two and
a half book since they're born so I'm as
far as I know no fault I'm still doing
well still doing it yeah doing very well
yeah
why does still in this matter stillness
what is it how stillness matters in two
in two respects one when you think about
your best moments of your life they were
not accomplishments they were moments
when you were locked in to
and transcendent experience another
person flow of a brilliant piece of
creativity whatever it is right the
moments we think about our fondest
memories are not moments when we were
doing doing doing they are almost always
the absence of doing it's I remember
when I was standing there on this Beach
I remember when we used to live here you
know I like those walks that I used to
go on you know that there are moments
like that I moments when I had the idea
for for this when I was at the gym and I
was you know things like that so those
are the wonderful moments it cut they
are stillness embody that come from
stillness yet they are rare why would
such a why would we make such a
wonderful thing rare if it doesn't need
to be the second thing I would go the
best work of your life did not come from
frantic busyness right so when I think
of Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis
when I think of a team when I think of
the the Patriots down 28 to 3 in the
Superbowl you know when you think of
moments where people did things that we
did not think was possible in an amount
of time we didn't think was possible
usually what they've done is they have
slowed things down they have accessed
some deeper part of themselves that they
don't normally have access to they they
were a hundred percent there that's to
me what stillness is and and so I wanted
to write a book about how do we
cultivate it and the interesting thing
is stillness does not come from outside
sources so it's already ours so it's
much more about unlocking something we
have than it is about going getting
something we don't have interesting
experientially that doesn't listen I
know that that is true but it doesn't
feel true so for somebody that's first
coming to that idea that this stillness
is already within them because they're
not gonna start thinking about stillness
until the chaos is long been raging
alright so [__] starts happening to you
when you're a little kid and your mind
never shuts off and so and then if you
have any level of ambition like they're
just the the still moments a seems super
rare so they they don't feel ever
present and a mere uncovering of
something and then I'll stop
but I mean think about what stillness is
it's it's it's about removing so you
can't you can't add by subtraction so it
must already be there do you know I'm
not saying it's not deeply covered up
I'm not saying it's locked deep inside
the one of the reasons they call it a
key is they were unlocking something
it's there you know there's a Zen saying
you are seeking a knocks but you are
already on it like you know the idea of
what you're riding the elephant you're
looking for the elephant it's underneath
you you already got it and so so it's
it's I think it's primarily about
removing things that's not to say that
going for a walk can't induce stillness
or that journaling can't induce
stillness or that you know going to
therapy you can't do it that's not say
you can't work on it but it's primarily
I don't think it's something that's in a
way it's the most equal thing there is
it's the thing we all have the potential
to have it's not a thing that only rich
people have that only men have whatever
it is it's it's just there in inherent
in our biology and what I think so
interesting about this idea of stillness
is like it's one of the few things that
appear in all the ancient schools and
religions you know the Buddhists have a
word for it the confute Confucius had a
word for it Marcus Aurelius talks about
it Jesus talks about it
st. Augustine talks about it like
everyone talks about stillness is that
that thing we know it when we see it the
problem is we don't see it
hmm so if you had to define exactly what
stillness is that would be useful and
then what's your favorite story in the
book that illustrates this the Cuban
Missile Crisis was great yeah I mean
that would I think I can illustrate what
stillness is through that story so you
look at Kennedy what goes to bed and
wakes up and they're like hey you know
that Cold War thing happening Russia is
currently building nuclear missiles in
Cuba 90 miles from American shores and
it's the worst news that probably that
any American president has ever gotten
right and so he rushes to the you know
to meet with his advisors you calls all
the leaders in the of the armed forces
what do we do
and ago obviously we have to blow Cuba
off the map
this is the nuclear war we feared it's
here let's go and and Kennedy just like
a few months before had experienced a
similar thing where basically it was or
wasn't told about and then kind of gave
a green light to the Bay of Pigs
invasion in Cuba and they said look we
got invaded Cuba through this like
secret means it's gonna be a lock you
know let's do it he green lights it he
doesn't really know what he's doing they
sort of bully him into it it goes
horribly then they bully him into
escalating it's like one of the most
embarrassing moments of American history
and so you would think he would go yep
let's do it
time is of the essence the world but
Kennedy goes if we bomb Cuba what do
they do like what is Russia do in
response and and the the generals
were like what they like literally never
thought about it you know what I mean
like they were just like no no no this
is you bomb it then you invade and then
hopefully we're still alive like that
was the extent and what Kennedy's
greatness was in and he was a flawed man
in many ways probably would not have
survived the me to hear about any but
but what Kennedy says there is is he
goes no we are gonna think this through
and we're gonna find out a way to
de-escalate this situation because he's
like he's like I'm not worried about I'm
not even just worried about what they're
gonna do I'm worried about the ninth
step he's like because none of us will
be around it'll go and the world will be
gone and he had this expression he said
we use time as a tool not as a couch
meaning you don't just sit back and do
nothing like that you use time as your
advantage and what he kept saying over
and over again like he knew Khrushchev
personally he'd just been in the room
with Khrushchev and Khrushchev had
basically beat the [__] out of him
Khrushchev had bullied him he thought
Kennedy was week he'd mocked him she'd
already embarrassed him if they have
pigs right and and so Kennedy could have
been like this my chance I'm gonna get
revenge Kennedy just goes like once
Khrushchev thinkin why did he do this
what did he hope would happen
what's success to him in this situation
and it kept asking these questions and
then he'd go for a swim in the White
House
then you go for a walk in the in the in
the White House Rose Garden
then he'd write he we have the notes
that he took as you got these briefings
and he would write things like he'd be
like consensus consensus consensus he's
like missiles missiles missiles he's
just right he's just thinking it through
there's a picture of a sailboat that he
drew he's doodling a sailboat he's
trying to calm himself down and so he
works through this and basically he
realizes that this isn't Khrushchev
thinking he's the strong part it's an
act of weakness
Khrushchev things like it's not going so
well for for for for communism if we can
humiliate the Americans this will be
good for it he think he thought he could
steal one and and so Kennedy goes does
he not understand how many more missiles
we have like does he not understand who
I am this is and he realizes that
Khrushchev has overreached that he
Khrushchev had rushed into this he had
not thought about it
so he's like we got to give these guys
some time to think about this we got to
show them that they made a mistake and
give them the opportunity to back out of
it so they end up putting a military
blockade around Cuba they don't attack
you but they go nothing's coming in or
out of Cuba this is not happening they
go to the UN they do some sort of
political theater that is embarrassing
to the to the Soviets they they
challenge the Soviet ambassador in
private not in public because they want
them to be able to back down even it was
Kennedy even calls it a quarantine and
not a blockade because a blockade sounds
more aggressive and there is a moment
where like American ships and a Soviet
submarine are like locked they say it
they were like nuclear powers were
eyeball-to-eyeball the fate of humanity
this you know all none of us might be
here right and and Kennedy's like
Kennedy just had a sense that he had
gotten it that is tense as they were
they were actually heading towards the
escalation and then boom they get like
at I got a telex or whatever how they
communicated back then from Khrushchev
and Khrushchev Slyke
I think we're pulling on a rope here and
we're tying the knot tighter
and eventually that nots got to be cut
and Kennedy's like yeah you think like
with a [__] you know but but what
Kennedy had managed to do was through
patience through empathy through wisdom
through an understanding of history
through a lack of self righteousness and
ego through a mastering of his emotions
had managed to take a situation that was
on the brink of catastrophic escalation
deescalate it but basically first not
make it worse
then deescalate it and then when he
starts talking to the Soviets he
realizes like okay they're gonna back
down because they know this is that they
know they they thought they were calling
a bluff and I proved this on a bluff and
he goes and then I'm gonna tell them in
private hey if you get once you back
down here I will remove missiles we have
in Turkey that may have actually pushed
you to do this in the first place and
let's solve this situation more or less
permanently as well so so when I say you
know stillness when you see it like I
don't know if I can give you a one
sentence definition of stillness but to
me that story is stillness and the world
would be a better place if more leaders
had that stillness I think you would be
a better boss if you had it I think I
would be a better writer if I had it I
think I'd be better in traffic if I had
join me in like Oh
everything we do is better for that
stillness because its clarity its
self-control its purpose you know it's
all the things that we know we want in
life are made possible by having that
that that accessing that force what I
love is that you're defining it more
than just because I think a key part of
it and if you would ask me to define it
I would have said the the mastery of
your emotions yeah but in that story in
the way that you ultimately define in
the book it's it's clearly a lot more
than just having control of your
emotions which is pretty interesting and
I actually tell that sort like so I
split the book up I say there's like
there's mental stillness there's sort of
emotional spiritual stillness and
there's physical stillness I actually
put the Missile Crisis primarily
in the mental stillness to me this is a
problem he solved logically and
rationally ironically Kennedy is a guy
who's like in the Cuban Missile Crisis
has one of his like sort of goons who
like pick up a girl from a nearby
college that he has sex with in a hotel
room you know I mean like Kennedy was
emotionally like when I hear that you
don't go oh that guy that's stillness
you think that's like spiritual
emptiness and awfulness right like he's
he thinks the world might be ending and
he's not with his family and he's not at
work he's getting his rocks off you know
in a creepy way you know less but the
point is like I think you got to attack
stillness from these three different
fronts but it's it's like can you have
the stillness to like actually think a
problem all the way through do you have
the stillness to master your emotions
and then do you have habits and
practices and you understand your
physical body well enough to have
stillness there as well yeah it's
interesting seeing the way that you
broke down the book into those one thing
that I found interesting about the this
particular story is that he once at all
de-escalates he actually ends up
thanking the gardener at the Rose Garden
for her role in because he just kept
going for walks yeah and I thought that
was interesting because obviously well
not obviously movement being outside
like things that have a very calming at
least effect on the mind I think is
pretty interesting yeah I mean mr.
Rodgers would talk about this is like
when I'm angry I go swim laps you know
what I mean it's like he's not saying
I'm not angry he's not denying that he
has anger he's a human being we just
like look I'd rather swim faster and
then come back and not yell at the
person but talk to them nicely you know
like and so I just loved the idea that I
owe something like mr. Rogers he's not
just born this way like he made that
that is a character that he lived his
whole life in do you know what I mean
you know and and and so yeah the
stillness isn't this even if it's
something we possess naturally it does
not occur naturally we have to cultivate
it just in the way that you cultivate
greatness or excellent sir
or I don't know your singing voice right
so how do we cultivate stillness well I
think it's a it's a it's a variety of
things I mean it on the one hand it
might be like what inputs you know do
you limit inputs do you have mentors you
know who are your models that you're
basing your life on you know it might be
hey I need to go I got an anger problem
from the childhood that I have so I'm
going to go to therapy and work on that
or it might be the sense that like I've
got that I wrongly have conflated in my
mind you know success and money and so
now money has this power over me in a
way that it shouldn't or it might be
like look like you don't have any
stillness because you eat terribly and
you don't sleep and you know you you
never exercise you know like the there I
don't think there's not one thing you do
but you have to you have to get it from
all these different things and it they
cultivate each other in the way that
like journaling is a physical act that
calms the mind and the emotions and the
more you work through your emotions in
your journal the more logical and
rational you can be mmm why'd you write
a book on still in this way why that
book why now I mean I think one the
short answer is you write whatever
you're interested in if you're right
like we were saying at the beginning you
you write where your heart goes it's
just it's just a pattern I was seeing
you know something I wanted more of in
my own life and it was something I was
seeing across all these different
schools when I think about an
egotistical person this is the previous
book in the series to see goes the enemy
what what is the what do they all have
in common they're frantic they're
miserable they're roiled by these sort
of this internal angst and and so just
and and what do I think about what what
are the people and an obstacle to people
who overcame these incredible things
that endured adversity that none of us
none of us most normal people couldn't
get through what what do they have on
the other side of that they have this
sort of incredible stillness I think of
Ulysses Grant he's sitting in this room
you know in a room like this you know
posing for a photograph
and somebody steps on a skylight above
him and the glass comes pouring down and
he just keeps talking you know what I
mean like because he's exposed himself
to like battle enough times he's
mastered that his mental and emotional
sort of hurt he's that's a guy with
nerve control and stillness and nerve
control I think they're part of the same
equation yeah that the ability to get
control of your biological systems I
think is is really important and really
in my life it's been very difficult to
do and worse it was easy everyone would
do it and it wouldn't be that rare very
very fair you do I remember right are
you have you done or are you doing
therapy yeah I go to therapy to what end
I think like I have a chapter in the
book about the inner child like most
though I think the reason most of us are
afraid of success or incapable of having
good relationships or feel angry all the
time or take things personally it is not
us
it's like a seven-year-old inside of us
or it's whatever age that we experienced
some trauma or were deprived of
something that you know slightly
healthier childhood would have would
have provided for us and so you know
what how how oh I just urge people to
think and don't I'm not a doctor so I
don't want to give advice but like you
can you can read about this there's
great writers you've talked about it but
just like think about like think about
that thing that gets you really angry or
think about that thing that makes you
really sad or think about that thing
that really makes you feel like a piece
of [__] and and go like how old is that
feeling now how old is it in your life
but like what age would you ascribe to
that feeling like so I have a lot of you
mean but I have like a lot of feelings
where it's like I'm I'm a 14 year old
boy that like people aren't appreciating
or seeing or loving and and then when I
think back to my own childhood it makes
total sense like I don't wanna get too
much into it but you get what I'm saying
it's like oh okay it's because there is
an unloved fourteen-year-old inside of
me actually has nothing to do with these
things I'm not saying these outside
situations aren't problematic I should
resolve them like Judd Apatow talks
about realizing that the movie studio
execs who were giving him notes on his
movies it he had to realize they weren't
his parents like these weren't his
parents who were getting a divorce
telling him what he telling him
contradictory things about what he's
allowed to do or not that these are
people who are trying to make the movie
better they might be wrong right the
notes might be utterly stupid he might
not be under no obligation to do them
but he doesn't need to
it doesn't need to spike his heart rate
and doesn't need to go you can't tell me
what to do and like it doesn't need to
make him miserable because it's just
objective notes from the people who paid
for the movie it's not [__] you dad you
know and that's all that like daddy
daddy look at me [__] you dad or like
you're not my mom you know like that
energy we all have and it pops out and
less than productive ways in our lives
so if you're gonna go to therapy that
would be a thing to work on and if you
were gonna package up therapy for people
so they couldn't go you're gonna go on
all of our behalf
what is it what are the mechanisms that
are useful is it just talking is it that
your therapist has particular insights I
mean I think a good therapist it depends
on different schools that we're training
but it's a mix of talking and then it's
it's like sometimes like in an inner
child work you sit and you go your
that's an empty chair and you were
talking to and for you like not to
psychoanalyze because I'm not qualified
again but you know maybe you're talking
to the the the eight year old fat Tom
who you know I don't you don't you're
talking to that kid and you're telling
him what your parents should have told
him or what a teacher should have told
him so he felt good and loved and felt
empowered and that you might be able to
tell him the things that you didn't
learn it till much later down the road
it's interesting when you were saying
that the first thing that popped in my
mind was not something cuz I definitely
felt loved certainly by my mother who
all
always made sure that I felt that no
matter what was going on the thing I
wish somebody had done for me was push
me a bit so when you were saying like oh
you did that and you didn't feel loved I
was actually thinking about like the
time the soccer ball hit me in the leg
cuz Tacomas [__] cold and you play
soccer largely in the winter and it left
the imprint of the ball on my leg and it
was it's [__] hurt and I was so whiny
and that I just walked off the field
yeah and what I wish is that somebody in
an effective manner not just to be mean
to me but that somebody had said toughen
up basically that that being tough is
valuable right that's what I wish
somebody had conveyed to me not in the
you know don't be a wuss not that's not
what I'm looking for what I'm looking
for is somebody to explain to me that a
suffering can be very useful be that
being tough certainly is useful and you
explained to me what it has become
arguably the most important lesson I've
learned in my life which is that you can
get tougher and it's important to do so
oh I totally agree and and maybe because
it's supposed to be it might be like why
didn't they do that right like do they
not think you were worth it right were
they preoccupied by other things where
they focused on a sibling you know like
wide and and did that man maybe maybe
the reason that standing out to you is
that there are lots of similar
situations where you really needed
someone to tell you something I'm not
super complicated thing that should have
been obvious and instead of doing that
they just let you do whatever because
they you know maybe they had low
expectations for you or maybe they they
they couldn't talk to you without
arguing or you know and so I'm sure it's
a little bit deeper than just like oh
why didn't you tell me to be tough yeah
like what but it's more like why didn't
you like not you know what I mean like
why didn't you think that I because I
have a little bit of that - it's like
why didn't you why didn't you push me
and it's like oh I don't think you
pushed me because you didn't think I was
capable of it and that's very sad
because if your parents aren't rooting
for you who's rooting for you you know
what I mean
and and what kind of effect does that
have on a person because you look around
and the other parents that the same
thing happened to another kid and the
dad did rush over and he reassured the
kid and he pushed him to do it and now
you know and and and and how would that
have changed the course of your life etc
I absolutely despise how important
childhood is for people like the amount
that it influences people does not freak
you out as a parent like yeah god
they're the the way that we take in
information as a child is so terrifying
and the knock-on effect that you can see
even in rats have you seen those studies
where if you take a rat and you even
remove it from its mother let's say it
has a mother that's a low it shows low
affection so it doesn't lick very often
and that rat will grow up anxious and
fearful just based on how much the mom
licked the rat so they thought okay well
maybe it's just genetic maybe you know
mothers that have that or actually
passing on something that just makes you
anxious and fearful
so they took low licking rat pups or
moms that were low licking and gave them
to mothers that were high licking and
the rats grow up to be fine
so it's like absolutely distressing to
me where's how much our childhood
imprints on us and ends up influencing a
lot of the brain wiring that we have and
our propensity to react in certain ways
oh yeah it is it is but then you then
you also you go look at what that you
what what the human experience has been
able to triumph over oh I'm just saying
like as somebody who wants to believe
that right now today hey you can become
whoever you want I when I was hearing
you talk about having a conversation
with the fourteen-year-old you and an
empty chair I was like oh my god the
amount of work yeah like to unwind some
of the stuff is and that is true but
also we're talking about optimizing at
the margins do you know I mean I'm not
sitting like my frustration with how I
was raised has not prevented me from
being very successful from rising to the
top my field it's being in a happy
marriage to having my own kids so it's
more like yeah isn't it also annoying
like how much like microscopic changes
our diet can affect performance or or
that even like I just I just I'm in LA
because I spoke to the Los Angeles Rams
like why do that why do NFL coaches and
players need to be inspired like you
would you know what I mean like you'd
think at that level with all the money
all the energy all of all the all that
they've been working towards it their
whole life all this and they still need
tiny you know bits it so I think I think
the good news is like basically anyone
no matter what you've gone through think
about the people that lived through the
Holocaust or lived through slavery or
you know extreme disabilities look at
what they've been able to accomplish
again this goes this Marcus quote like
if it's humanly possible you can do it
almost certainly whatever you and I have
gone through whatever anyone has gone
through somebody has gone through worse
and managed to triumph over it so she'd
take encouragement from that and then we
can go that being said so so basically
what you went through does not excuse or
exempts you or keep you out of the race
towards greatness then you're going
towards greatness you want to get there
you're gonna have to eventually look
under the hood and fine-tune some things
yes I agree with everything you said the
only thing that that gives me unease and
continued turmoil is some people seem so
stuck and I'll put it this way there are
people in my life who I love very much
who are like when you take the and this
quote actually apparently isn't Mother
Teresa but is so often attributed to her
I was just give her the credit
no one will act for the many but people
will act for the one so it's like for
all the things that I do you know trying
to impact people at scale I come back to
the people I'm closest to that I love
that oh I'm trying to like find the way
to help them right okay you write a book
for one person correct because it's the
only thing you can really wrap your
hands around right and I can't figure
out some of the people that I'm closest
to I can't figure out how to help them
past whatever happened to them in their
childhood that has them stuck they gave
them a frame of reference that is
empowering that
not only a frame of reference but like a
neurochemical reward system where they
just continue to make decisions that do
not serve them and now how the [__] do
you get them past that yeah and maybe
it's uh maybe it's not something you
control
and it's not gonna it's gonna unlock
itself do you know I like not saying
it's not no no I want some people are
never going to get along know what I'm
saying is like there's a Zen expression
when the student is ready the teacher
appears yes and maybe you're not the
teacher or you're not the teacher at
this moment you know what I mean it may
be that that a hurricane's gotta move
the boulder a little bit and then it's
possible to be pushed by by humans you
know yeah I don't think you're bothered
by that reality because I totally
acquiesce to the truth of that yes but
it doesn't seem to bother you at quite
the level that it bothers me yeah but
but look at the core of stoicism is
ultimately like nothing you focus on
yourself at the expense of other people
but you ultimately go it's not in my
control right now it's not on my control
right now being upset about it doesn't
do anything being sad about it doesn't
do anything you know what I mean like
it's oh I'm not being blase but but but
I am being I am I'd rather move on than
despair yeah
it's one of those where that is the
absolute right answer and yet I find
that some of what drives me is probably
what is an artificial carrot it is
almost certainly true that some people
I'm never going to be able to impact and
I accept the truth of that and yet being
inspired to try to find a way to take
the hardest case of people that I care
about and say I want to find a way cuz
if I can impact this sort of at the
extreme hard case then all the people
that are in the middle then I will have
been able to help well look you probably
like this quote I don't know the
beginning but it basically the idea is
like all progress depends on the
irrational man right the person who
believes they can pull the impossible
thing off it's ultimately what does it
that doesn't mean that it's great to be
the irrational man you know that doesn't
mean it's fun to be the irrational man
it doesn't necessarily mean that we
to be the irrational man do you know
what I'm saying I do and I think we do I
think Oh God
I don't know if this is me now trying to
put my value system onto other people
but I really think that being the
irrational man is the only right answer
and that Oh God
yeah you have to have a whole host the
the all all of my reactions right now
are the reason that I'm writing a book
is because when I go to give somebody a
an Instagram answer to a question I'm
always like I'm lying to them because
I'm oversimplifying us and that the
reality is so [__] complicated that
the only way to capture this is is to
really write the whole book so when I
think about like okay being the
irrational man allowing yourself to
believe that anything is possible so you
have beliefs beliefs are part of the
formula but values are part of the
formula Y values because values are
where you ultimately hardwired into
yourself to get a neurochemical response
from pursuing the things because pursuit
is all you have you may never achieve it
so if the pursuit isn't fun if it isn't
deeply fulfilling there's no reason to
pursue it but as somebody who lunch
lavished in my emotional weakness and
thought there was no problem with it and
saw myself as solely airy which I'm
assuming as a reference you will get and
I lived there and almost I found
identity in it for sure
in being like I'm just smart enough to
realize how much smarter other people
are and like I I thought that there was
something interesting to that and then
entirely changed my value system no
longer allowed myself to worship at the
altar of weakness began to hold myself
to a different standard but not so I
could sell flagellate myself I don't I
don't beat myself up when I'm weak about
something I'm like hey I'm gonna push
myself because I know the depths of
fulfillment of sin your pursuit it
doesn't matter whether I actually
accomplished it just am I really really
trying this or am I just giving rhetoric
to the fact that I'm trying and as long
as I know that I'm really really trying
it's very interesting so I believe that
so you've got the beliefs you've got
values that's part of it but then
there's even like habits routines the
default Network of the brain like
rewiring yourself so that you actually
get a neurochemical response for
pursuing things that are difficult so
for instance I [__] ate cold showers
but I do them I took ones because they
make me feel better about
would you say I took one this morning
you and I both yeah so I get were saying
writing a book is like on the scale of a
rational man thinks writing a book to
help people is like the lowest hello you
know what I mean it like but trying to
individually save every person probably
you know and I just I guess what I'm
saying is like look I'm glad I live in a
world of Elon Musk's I don't want to be
that Elon Musk I want to be a different
version of Elon Musk you know and you
know I must have bad example it's like
look we are benefi benefit from the
horrible murderous conquerors who who
settled this country right that doesn't
mean that what they did was great you
know that doesn't mean I would go for
millions of Indians but like I've
certainly benefit from it so the the
history and society to progress depends
on the irrational man in that sense but
you got to decide who you're gonna be
what do you hope people take away from
stillness is the key I hope they think
better I think they find I think they
they improve their soul and then I hope
they improve their spirit and body like
I I hope they I hope it's sort of a
holistic way to em to improve their life
because I don't think they're I don't
think greatness is really greatness if
it comes at the expense of misery or
happiness or your ability to even
recognize that you've achieved greatness
right like Billie Jean King the tennis
greats she was saying like look like the
relentless desire to improve and to
never be satisfied with your performance
is what makes a champion but it also
prevents it a champion from realizing or
even enjoying or even realizing that
they are a champion Jin I mean and so to
me greatness true true greatness is to
have done it maybe not with the dark
energy right to have accomplished it and
be happy to have greatness and success
maybe to bring out
back to where we were earlier and and
that's what I'm hoping to get people
like I would just maybe it's a fantasy
of mine but I would just love the idea
that like like I would love Hemingway
who doesn't kill himself at the end who
basically doesn't abused women who is a
good father I don't I don't see why the
work and the monster have to exist
simultaneously and and so ultimately I
think it's a book about how do you how
do you get the things you want in a
better way man I think that's a
profoundly cool thing to want and I like
the way that you explain it that the
greatness and the monster don't have to
coexist there's something interesting
about Kanye West though yeah when I look
at that and look I don't know the guy at
all so this is me cobbling together
things from the outside but hearing some
of the things that he said about like
taking medicine I don't know what word
used for it to try to regulate his
emotions and everything then made him
numb and and made it impossible for him
to create sure there is something to
that and I don't believe in the tortured
genius
I certainly won I have achieved success
without torture or genius yeah so that
does it yeah you know that doesn't seem
like prerequisites right but it there
it's a fine line to walk between you can
see how the the madness when it comes in
just the right way and I use that I
guess in a colloquial way I don't mean
literal madness but the like where
you're you're sort of existing outside
of the confines of the way that other
people think and limit themselves in
ways that they don't even realize
they're limiting themselves right yeah
no I agree and look maybe Connie is a
better example than Elon Musk I'm glad
to live in a world of Kanye I'm glad I
don't live in Kanye's worlds yeah so you
don't I mean I don't want to live in his
head you know look Donald Trump being
Donald Trump made him president would
you trade places with him get not a
political thing I'm saying would you
live in Donald Trump's brain if it meant
you got to be President I almost no one
would take that trade and so it's like
how but
right under Kanye West there's all sorts
of other musicians who are not and that
that's why I think the argument it's so
hard I guess we're asking like what
scales
you know because okay sure we're for
Kanye but like I mean most musicians
don't have that problem you know what I
mean like most musicians are able to be
super creative and create brilliant
things and and and they don't have to
storm the stage of the Grammys and you
know they don't have to say these things
so it I guess why is it on us to prove
that that that like you know maybe it's
on him to prove that actually we can't
have one without the other you know it's
interesting to me is like I think maybe
a slightly different question is the
right question which is how do you step
outside of the perspective that the
world has to see things in you whether
it's Elon Musk who I think is
extraordinarily good at that of saying
like so many people would say well I
can't be a rocket scientist because I
didn't go to engineering school and he's
like but you can read the books and as
long as you can understand it and yeah
and you recognize sort of the the laws
of physics and you adhere to them like
you know as long as it doesn't violate
the laws of physics yeah I can figure it
out or Kanye with music you know the
same thing or jay-z with what he's done
with both business and music of just
being able to step outside you know
we're all we're constantly constructing
our vision of the world and this is this
is one of my own personal obsessions in
fact this is largely what was driving my
desire to do this show is like I want to
get farther and farther outside of the
way that other people view the world so
that I can do something new and
different because the way that everybody
is seeing things the way that I've been
seeing things like in fact this will be
the easiest way to sum this up my
current skill set has already taken me
as far as it's going to take me and said
another way my current perspective is
already taking me as far as it's gonna
take me so now how do I begin to to
knock myself askew and so often people
need some sort of life-changing event
becoming apparent the death of a loved
one like write something that that
allows them the freedom of
I'm no longer beholden to the way that
that people see me or or I'm no longer
beholding to their framework of the
world and and bear with me one more
second so I just had Molly bloom on
impact Theory do you know who Molly
Blair yeah yeah well I guess technically
not the poker player but she she built
the game and she was talking about how
when when she got arrested and there
were 17 federal agents machine guns on
her her flash lights in her face and she
was like there was so much freedom in I
had failed in front of the entire world
and so all of the the things that had
been just closing in on me for years the
need to succeed the need to prove people
wrong then because her brothers I guess
are both prodigies one was a two-time
Olympic medalist I think and then played
in the NFL and her another brother yet
her other brother is a harvard-trained
cardiothoracic surgeon and so she just
felt invisible and her family growing up
and so her child [__] yeah exactly
and so she was like all the sudden like
the that frame of reference she didn't
use those words but that frame of
reference that she had built that said
she had to do and be all of these
sayings it shattered into a million
pieces
and rather being sort of the lowest of
the low moments or I'm sure it was
briefly but she said then it was like it
was freedom
yeah and what I want to get to is okay I
I really have no interest in being a
tortured genius like so if you said to
me hey you can have genius but it comes
at the expense of torture I would say no
no no I'm just fine like because I know
fulfillment at the end of the day is is
really the only thing that matters and
hopefully that that I'm always shocked
at how unselfish
that feeling profoundly and unshakably
good yeah nothing is forever even
fulfillment is is it sort of ebbs and
flows but having that sort of anti
fragile like I do hard things I
contribute to this world I'm constantly
trying to improve I can feel that my
egos not built around anything fragile
is not built around being good or better
or smart or anything like that it's you
know
learning and helping and all of those
things that you know that that is all
that matters
so that would be a fantastic definition
of stillness interesting
that's what equanimity means the
inability to to be shaken the stoic word
for it is apatheia when you're not
jerked around by any of these external
things the the Epicureans called it
ataraxia like all that that's what
enlightenment is that's what nirvana is
right that like you get there that and
and and so I think that's what that's
what I'm saying so we think stillness is
this sort of this absence this weakness
this it's laying back I think it's it's
the opposite of that it's like really
getting in there and like what you're
saying with Molly I think it's we all
have those moments I think ideally we're
looking at scalable strategy we're like
okay how can we get that flash of
insight from a source other than 17
federal agents because you've been
running you know what I mean because
like it's really about what happens next
that's important so can we get can we
get there from reading a book can we get
there from therapy can we get there from
a mentor can we get there from maybe
it's psychedelics can we get there from
doing work mm-hmm
you know do we have to blow up or less
I'm very anti psychedelics really yes we
talked about this no tell me more I have
to buy to flip answers or I haven't
heard anyone tell me anything from
psychedelics that I haven't seen in
basically every rudimentary
philosophical texts you know and - I
would like to know from any point in
human history where a magical drug or
pill was able to fix any spiritual issue
for any person at any sustainable at any
sustainable level what do you think
about the new trials and stuff for MDMA
usage for PTSD and stuff like that I
those would be the two instances where
I'm not only not opposed to it but I'm
very Pro it Pro very for it because
treatment resistant depression you're
already trying really difficult drugs
PTSD some
profoundly bad has happened to you so
the idea that you'd be willing to gamble
some things to fix it totally for
especially if it's being done in a
medical setting you know by people know
what they're doing what I'm really
starting to get worried about is people
who are not doctors who are sort of
freely prescribing you know
transformative medical experiences as a
magical solution to really profound
issues that people have so my like I
would love through the medical community
to do what the medical community is
gonna do I just I just don't like this
idea that like we should be like
tweeting and you know making videos
about it it just makes me nervous I
don't have any judgment for anyone who's
talking about it or doing it just makes
me very nervous because like
historically I just don't see a lot of
precedents for that ending well usually
it blows up in everyone's face and we
are living in a time where like because
a lot of this mentality is coming from
Silicon Valley where Silicon Valley
through some of those thinking has
kicked out some important legs of the
stool on which society depends do you
know what I mean well now this is
getting really interesting I just I
don't know it's like what like what if
the internet can replace our
relationships with other people or like
what if we can just have an app that
fixes this problem and then we're like
oh wait you basically blew up civil the
civilized world's you know what I'm
saying I think that's actually happening
I just I just mean like we can't even
agree on what reality is anymore and I
think social media has largely
exacerbated that if not created the
problem to begin with so you have a son
yes one of the reasons that I am glad I
don't have kids if you had given me
immersive virtual sex as a teenager yeah
I would never have left I'm not sure who
would have so it like that one that
scares me I am so glad that we don't or
that we didn't have the internet when I
was a teenager I just I worry about how
many
I would have lost to porn yeah being
sane yeah or just like can you imagine I
don't have a daughter but like United
mean wait your second all right you have
two boys really yeah for some reason I
thought for sure you had a daughter
reason now if but if I had a daughter
and then it's look at problem for boys
too but to be a 13 year old girl is
already a deeply insecure overwhelming
experience where you feel like you're
being judged where you feel like you
don't measure up you know all these
things
I can't imagine adding Instagram to that
do you know what I mean yeah like this
is terrifyingly so like you already fit
nobody thinks that adults don't think
they look good in pictures right what
does it 13 year old what business is a
thirteen-year-old have managing a
modeling account for herself which is
essentially what Instagram is and it
like look models have always gone
through this and so celebrities and you
know public people but we used to pay
people a lot of money like I have a
social media account and I have to deal
with the fact that people say mean
things or I post something that I
thought was cool and people didn't like
it but I got paid a lot of money you
know what I mean like I'm compensated
for this 16 year old is not yeah yeah
man I I'm conflicted because when I
think about the people that I have had
access to the ideas that I've had access
to because of the internet because of
social media when I think about the fact
that I've essentially dedicated my adult
life and my fortune to helping people
via shershow media so it's like there
there are there's tremendous of not if
it's five my work would not have broken
through without social media and so and
you know as as problematic as the
Internet has been I also it was also a
wonderful experience for me like I sort
of remember you know getting in I got an
email address in me like fifth grade and
I was very early to it but I like I this
world was very different than the world
that I existed in which my parents did
not understand me in which I was not
particularly sort of believed in or or
pushed like I was oh my god there's this
world out here with more people like me
in it and so there's
wonderful things and a lot of so even as
an adult a good chunk of I had dinner
last night with someone that I who I
found out liked my work from social
media and it was awesome you know I mean
like this is not just a random person is
an interesting person but like you know
like the point is like all of the
there's so many pros there's just also a
lot of downside yeah [__] all right so
let's go back to what's going on in
Silicon Valley so yeah what in what way
is it just the experiment with the
internet and apps that you're saying is
key I just I just mean like you know I
just feel like I've this this probably
getting into just like lame social
commentary but it's just like weren't
these people just telling us that
Bitcoin was we're gonna replace money
which created an enormous financial
bubble you know weren't these people
just telling us that polyamory was the
future of relationships you know what I
mean like what what is tinder and and
these other apps done to the dating
dating world it's just not everything
needs to be disrupted you know and and
there are always consequences and
unintended consequences for the things
that we do and I think we're just the
the problem is the unintended
consequences come far enough down the
road and so I just wish there was a
little bit more intellectual humility
from these people who are talking about
how they found a plant in the Amazon
rainforest that is all upside and notice
yeah it's interesting I I have a very
weird relationship with drugs so I'm
super probably afraid is the right word
so I didn't have my first drink of
alcohol until I was 26 Wow and I
probably wouldn't have even done that if
I hadn't met my wife and she was like no
no come on like this'll be fun let's do
it together
I don't have an addictive personality so
I I don't have a fear of becoming
addicted what I have is a fear of always
had a fear of doing anything that would
[__] up my brain like I'm just super
psychotic about that
I've tried micro dosing yeah and it
didn't do anything for me and because I
worry enough about doing things in my
brain and but I've never gone all the
way to you know some transformative
experience and then at the same time as
a writer I was writing the sea
in future which is the comic book that
we created and I wrote about a guy and I
really wanted him to have like this a
moment that that shifted his
consciousness that not not not in some
grand psychedelic way just like a little
bit like look at things just a little
bit and my natural reaction was to have
him do drugs yeah because it works yeah
like when I think about when I drink
which I don't do very often but when I
drink it's like I feel like I'm
suppressing the urge to dance on the
table and that's that is a wonderful
feeling right so I drink on occasion
with my wife when we get into like this
little cocoon like it does the reason
that this [__] lives on and it lingers
and all that is because it actually does
something and so for somebody that one
I'm super keen to try MDMA yeah I want
to do it with my wife I don't want to do
it in a clinical setting yeah but I
think that would be [__] awesome yeah
maybe I don't know I think it's it's
also again it's a little flip but like
if it was so transcendent and
transformative why did I have to do it
multiple times that's fair and I've
heard people give that criticism like
hey this isn't something that you should
be doing over and over and over this
right and yet it's it because I think
that is the nature of drugs and I'm not
trying to say like oh it's a gateway
drug you're gonna get addicted but the
nature of drugs is is you are getting
the thing without the work for the thing
right and very rarely do you tell humans
here's a shortcut take the law and then
they take the long way that's just not
how we're wired right you know you you
want the shortcut all the time do you
meditate not really interesting I tried
to write a book about stillness without
invoking or talking about meditation
very much because you know ramita the--
talks about how like look people aren't
going to make budgets they're just not
going to make budgets so don't tell them
to make budgets cuz you're you're
already starting them you're already
setting them up to fail and so I wanted
to talk about stillness from a variety
of other angles that would make their
life tangibly better mm-hmm that would
not require them to do a thing that
either they're not cut out to do
they're not willing to do and if they
are cut out for it well there's like 8
trillion books about that yeah because
of the physiological what I call
physiological hooks
I think meditation is quite literally
something every single human being
should do now if you do it and then
reject it Hey fine for a nap like if you
know how to diaphragm breathe and get
yourself out of the sympathetic nervous
system into the parasympathetic but it's
one of those where thankfully I
discovered meditation probably about
four years ago and then I went through a
brutally brutally stressful time in my
life it wasn't [__] crazy and when I
think about if I hadn't had meditation
during that period like whoa that that
legitimately I worry about the toll that
would have taken on me and I not been
able to de-escalate my nervous system
yeah I know I I tend to find that I get
that meditative experience from walking
from swimming from you know from getting
into flow states from other things but
you know if I could it if if the times
that I tried it it worked very well for
me I'd be doing it all the time right
haven't been able to get there super
interesting
all right men where should people find
you where should they find the book yes
which is rad okay still this is a key
available everywhere books are sold you
can follow me I'm at Ryan holiday but I
won't actually reach you will I usually
no I don't even I don't even really
check them but then there's a Ryan
holiday to the net and then if you're
interested in the stoicism stuff we're
talking about there's daily still calm
which is a free email that goes out
every day and then if you can't even do
an email there's a daily Stoke on
Instagram which is a quote from the
Stokes every day to think about and then
the thing you should be promoting which
I'm startled that you were not is the
daily Stoke on YouTube oh yeah which is
one of the only platforms that matter in
my opinion and it's most underrated of
all the social no it's going to rule the
world soon enough I promise you it is so
much better algorithmically than
everything else it's out there as a
content creator if you're creating
content you're not on [__] YouTube
you're out of your mind and the stuff
that you're doing on YouTube is rad
yeah so I guess it's youtube.com slash
dance dog get after it
yeah my man thank you so much for coming
on the show anytime you have something
to promote I'd love to sit down with you
John again I love the way your mind
works Oh awesome when you're here stop
by cool everybody thanks for joining us
for conversations with Tom no the Stokes
would say prepare for the day ahead and
then you're supposed to reflect on the
day that just passed and so that sort of
process of preparing in the morning and
reviewing in the evening allows me to
never get too far from where I want to
be